# Sprint 1 - 01/08

First sprint of the year. Woot!

## Running Ethereum Nodes

- [x] Ethereum.org: [Run a Node](https://ethereum.org/en/run-a-node/)
   - Runs a client (copy of Ethereum blockchain and keeps up to date) on PC/dedicated hardware while connected
   - Vlaues: privacy, censorship resistance, participation and rewards, decentralization, fork-resistance, sovereignity
   - Build (with DAppNode app or CLI) or buy (DAppNode or Avado managed)
   - Specs: 4-8GM RAM + 2 TB SSD 
      + Intel NUC 7th gen or higher
   - Post-merge: Execution Layer (EL) vs Consensus Layer (CL)
      + EL / **Eth1 client  listens to txn broadcasted, executes in EVM and holds latest state**
      + CL / Beacon Node / **Eth2 client implements POS consensus**
   - Pre-merge and after beacon chain CL and EL were separate networks with txns and user activity on the EL. 
   - EL and CL are supported in different programming languages to reduce dependency on single codebase. 
   - Node types: 
      + Full: full blockchain data, participates in block validationg, serves network and provides data on request. Reconstructs old state from requests made to archive nodes. 
      + Light: downloads on ly block headers and independently verifies data against state roots. Does not perform full verification. 
      + Archive: Stores everything in full node and builds archive of historical states. Used for blokc explorers, wallet vendors and chain analytics. 
   - Why run own node:
      + Run an ethereum wallet with your own node for more security and privacy by importing custom RPC. 
      + Run own services that depend on data from Ethereum: validator, layer 2, infra, block explorers
      + Connect to own node over IPC and load custom programs as plugins for low latency, or frontrunning
      + Direct/solo staking
   - Nodes as a service: infura, alchemy, chainstack, quiknode, archivenode*
   - **Execution/ETH1 Clients**: Geth, Nethermind, Besu, Erigon, Akula 
      + differs by sync strategies, supporedt OS, architecture/performance,  language, supported testnets and features
      + All clients are required to pass [client tests](https://github.com/ethereum/tests)
   - **Consensus/ETH2 clients**: Lighthouse, Lodestar, Nimbus, Prysm, Teku
      + Differs by language, OS, Networks, supported environments, licenses, and features. 
   - **Sync Modes** - to verify current data in network by downloading data from peers, verifying integrity and building a local blockchain db
      + Full sync: downloads all blocks and generates state of blockchain by executing every block from genesis (days to weeks)
      + Fast sync: downloads all blocks and verifies headers (hours)
      + Light sync: downloads block header and data, verifies randomly. Syncs only tip of chain. (minutes)
      + Snap sync: Uses dynamic snapshots from peers to download account and storage data without trie nodes and reconstructs merkle locally. Saves disk and network bandwidth. 
      + Optimistic sync: import beacon blocks without full verification. Finds latest heade and start syncing with above methods
      + Checkpoint sync / Weak subjectivity sync: sync beacon chain from a recent weak subjectivity checkpoint. Makes initial sync time faster with similar trust assumptions as syncing from genesis.
- [x] [Spinning up a Node](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/run-a-node/)
   - not to be confused with mining, does not require as much computing power. 
   - size and speed required depends on configuration and sync strategy. 
   - min specs 2 core CPU/ 8GB RAM, 700 GB disk, 10MBit/s bandwidth
   - recommended specs: 4 cores/16GM RAM, fast SSD 1TB, 25 MB/s bandwidth
   - Manual setup
      + choose (1) execution client and (2) consensus client. Consider [client diversity](https://clientdiversity.org/) - currently (1) Geth 70% and (2) Prysm 40% + Lighthouse 37%
      +  verify software binary by checking `sha256sum` against release page
      +  choose a sync mode, choose a network
   -  EL and CL communicate over an **authenticated endpoint specified in Engine API** implemented by execution client. The execution client generates a jwtsecret at a known path. Both clients should run on the same machine and share this known path to authencate the local RPC connection. 
   -  Consensus client: if running a validator, specify ethereum address for fee recipient. 
   -  Consensus client serves as a beacon node for validators to connect. 
   -  Execution client offer RPC API endpoints to submit/read txns. 
   -  All consensus clients expose a Beacon API to check status of the consensus client or download blocks and consensus data
   -  when exposing RPC endpoints for execution client, declare only modifiable methods with a flag e.g. `--http.api web3,eth,txpool`
   -  another method to expose RPC is over Tor onion service, without a static public IP or exposed ports.
   -  exposed IP/ports can be additionally secured with VPN e.g. openVPN. 
   -  Nodes do not have to be online 24/7 i.e. can be shutdown/restart. 
      +  Shutting down can take a few minutes to complete current state writing 
      +  Forced shutdown can damage local db, requires resync
      +  Needs to resync on restart
      +  Does not apply to consensus validators. 
   -  Run clients on services e.g. `systemd` to ensure autostart, use limited privileges for this. 
   -  Keep client up to date especially before hard forks. 
   -  Monitor node activity. Clients provide metrics endpoints . Use influx/prometheus/grafana. 
      +  [Monitoring Geth](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/tutorials/monitoring-geth-with-influxdb-and-grafana/)
- [ ]
- [ ] [**AMB on Ethereum**](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/managed-blockchain/latest/ethereum-dev/managed-blockchain-ethereum-overview.html)
- [ ] [Should I Run a Full Node](https://github.com/ethereumbook/ethereumbook/blob/develop/03clients.asciidoc#should-i-run-a-full-node)
- [ ] [Ethereum on ARM](https://ethereum-on-arm-documentation.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
- [ ] [VB](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/05/23/scaling.html) Limits to Blockchain scalability
- [ ] [How the Merge impacted ETH supply](https://ethereum.org/en/upgrades/merge/issuance/)
- [ ] [Raspberry PI 4](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/tutorials/run-node-raspberry-pi/) as a Node

